Sometimes before a system or project ever gets launched and is just
a gleam in the eye of an executive of a company,
they will ask you for information to help them make that decision.
Using business data analytics may be your path to answering those questions.
Let business data analytics be your friend.
Here's a quote.
"We're entering a new world in which data may be more important than software.
" That's a quote from Tim O'Reilly, founder of O'Reilly Media.
Well, I think we're already there.
It seems like today we are awash in data,
so having good technical and analytical skills and tools to
make sense of all this data is critical.
Business data analytics will help you get there.
So what is business data analytics?
Data analytics is the science of analyzing raw data in order
to make decisions about that information.
Data is extracted and tagged to identify and
analyze behavioral data and patterns.
As a technical BA, you are looking for underlying patterns,
relationships, trends, and other characteristics.
With business data analytics,
businesses can augment decision making through visual dashboards and reports.
This is a very large and broad field,
ranging from using a SQL statement all the way to artificial intelligence.
So, maybe you've heard of data mining.
What's the difference between data analytics and data mining?
Well, let's find out.
So let's look at data mining versus data analytics.
Data mining is the processes to search for,
collect, convert,
and/or prepare raw data structures into reasonable
and coalesced repositories of data,
whereas data analytics is a systematic method of discovering,
analyzing, and interpreting that data to make better data-driven decisions.
So data mining collects and aggregates the data,
while data analytics interprets and reports on that data.
Why use business data analytics?
Well,
many times it is important for companies to understand their business data
first before making any sort of investment either in equipment,
labor or technology.
Data analytics technologies and techniques are widely used
in business today to enable organizations to make more
informed business decisions,
and by scientists and researchers to verify or
disprove scientific or business models, theories or hypotheses.
Also, to help reveal hidden patterns and create useful insight during analyses.
Also to help determine what data might be useful to capture going forward,
or how many employees,
customers or systems may be impacted by the data requirements.
When to use business data analytics.
Well, pretty much always.
There should always be a technical BA constantly looking at the company's data,
where they spend too much in costs, determining the customer profile,
who buys the most from the company, to determine why sales are going up or down.
You get the idea.
That said, there is such a wide variety of tools,
some simple and some extremely complex.
Initially use your current in-house tools first, if possible.
Many cloud-based systems today come with their own
reporting or analytical tools.
That's great,
but you will likely have many systems and data sources
that will help you run your company,
so you must first use business data analytic techniques and tools to
integrate and interpret from across all those sources.
Business data analytics is used by companies
committed to data-driven decision making.
Data-driven companies treat their data as a corporate asset
and leverage it for competitive advantage.
You can be right there helping them do that with your skills.
Here's how you might approach business data analytics for the first time.
Let's assume your manager asks you to do some data research,
so you will do some data mining first,
document the outcome or requirement provided by management,
have a good requirement statement laid out.
Next, perform interface analysis.
That is, determine your domain of systems,
datastores and endpoints,
that may contain the information or data you need to research.
We will talk more about the interface analysis skill in the very next section.
Access the data and/or data models in each system or datastore.
Determine real-time access or repository access.
You might be able to use your data analytics tools directly against the
real-time live system if it does not affect performance.
But many times you may have to grab,
export or migrate the data into a repository using an ETL,
or extract, transform, and load tool.
Use visual, if possible, tools to perform your analyses.
In this case, you might have needed an ETL tool,
maybe SQL Server, and let's say Power BI or Looker as your visual tool.
Refine, tweak, and readjust.
Since you will find that your results may seem
suspicious at times in the beginning,
and many times you will find data errors in the source systems,
so you may need to adjust your data mining procedures to collect better data,
or in the way in which you use your data analytical tools as well.
Now, it is an iterative and incremental process for sure between your sponsor,
the data, and even your data sources may change.
How you access it may change, how you aggregate may change.
These are just to name a few ways things may change.
And the tools, not all tools may work for you,
but please choose sparingly so you're not spending more time
learning the tool than actually using the tools.
Here are some examples of the many business data
analytics tools in the market today,
and you can even recognize Excel's in the list.
Why not start with that if that's something you already have and it's low
cost and it's a pretty good data aggregator as well?
But many of the other tools are what I would consider very high end.
This is just a representative list to get you started in the right direction.
Here's an example of one of those tools, Power BI's Dashboard.
Please don't try to read this slide.
The value of this slide is to point out how visual these tools can be. I will always emphasize visual tools.